“Oh, would some power the gift give us
“to see ourselves as others see us!
It would from many a blunder free us.”
Well, that famous quote
from the Scottish poet Robert Burns
acknowledges that it is impossible
to always see ourselves as others do.
Well, that’s why we need training.
That’s why we need advice.
That’s why we need counsel
to help us to improve
and to work on certain flaws
that perhaps we just can’t see in ourselves.
Well, what a wonderful opportunity
you students at Gilead have had
to receive focused spiritual training
from brothers who truly love you!
And now, no doubt you’ve come
to see yourself more clearly
than you have ever seen yourself before.
But, you know, that quote from Robert Burns
can be understood in a different way too.
See, maybe what we
cannot see clearly in ourselves
are all of the good qualities that we possess
or the potential that we have
to be used by Jehovah in his service.
First Samuel 16:7 says:
“Man sees what appears to the eyes,
but Jehovah sees into the heart.”
Well, in seeing into your heart,
Jehovah saw fit to draw you
into a dedicated relationship with him.
And since then, he’s entrusted you
with various assignments in his service.
Now, why?
Why did Jehovah do that?
What does he see in you?
What qualities
and what spiritual qualifications
does he observe?
Well, we can’t know
all that Jehovah sees in you
because we cannot see ourselves
as Jehovah sees us.
That’s probably why
so many of God’s servants in Bible times
were reluctant
to accept challenging assignments.
Now, just think of some examples of this
—people who did not see
the fine qualities in themselves
that Jehovah could see.
For example, take Gideon.
Now, in Judges chapter 6, let’s look at this.
At Judges 6:14,
notice what Jehovah said to Gideon.
He said: “Go with the strength you have,
“and you will save Israel
out of Midian’s hand.
Is it not I who send you?”
But now, how did Gideon react?
In verse 15, Gideon said:
“Pardon me, Jehovah.
How can I save Israel?
“Look!
My clan is the least in Manasseh,
and I am the most insignificant
in my father’s house.”
Well, obviously, Gideon
could not see himself as Jehovah saw him.
What about Moses?
In Exodus chapter 4,
when Jehovah assigned him
to lead Israel out of Egypt,
Moses was keenly aware
of all of his inadequacies.
In fact, when talking with Jehovah,
he raised one objection after another.
Well, was Jehovah aware
of the inadequacies that Moses had?
Of course!
Of course he was!
He also knew
that Moses’ brother, Aaron, was older
and that he was a better speaker.
But Jehovah saw in Moses qualities of faith,
unselfishness, and meekness
—qualities that made Moses
the right choice for the job.
What about Jeremiah?
When Jehovah commissioned him to serve
as a prophet, do you remember what he said?
Let’s look at it.
Jeremiah chapter 1
—Jeremiah chapter 1—
and look at verse 6.
Jeremiah says:
“Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah!
I do not know how to speak,
for I am just a boy.”
Well, what did Jehovah say?
‘Oh. OK. OK, Jeremiah,
I’ll see if I can find someone else.’
No.
Look in verse 7:
“Jehovah then said to me:
‘Do not say, “I am just a boy.”
“‘For you must go to all those
to whom I send you,
and you should say everything
that I command you.’”
Why was Jehovah so confident
that Jeremiah was the right choice
for this special assignment?
Well, of course, if you look in verse 8,
Jehovah said: “I am with you.”
Now, of course, that’s the same thing
that Jehovah said to Gideon;
it’s the same thing he said to Moses.
In other words,
because Jehovah was with them,
they would be successful.
But there’s another reason too.
Do you see what it says in verse 5?
Jehovah said to Jeremiah:
“Before I formed you in the womb
“I knew [isn’t that interesting? I knew] you,
“and before you were born I sanctified you.
I made you a prophet to the nations.”
Jehovah knew Jeremiah.
He saw in Jeremiah certain qualities
that would make him an effective prophet
with Jehovah’s help.
Well, could Jeremiah see that in himself?
No.
He just had to trust in Jehovah’s assessment,
move forward,
and do what Jehovah asked him to do.
Well, we have wonderful examples of this
in our modern day too.
Brother John Booth
was a faithful, humble brother.
He started in full-time service in 1928.
Now, in 1935,
he was called to work
at the factory at Bethel.
But now, just after working for a few days,
he was very surprised
when Brother Knorr invited him
to go on the road
as a regional service director,
what we would perhaps call
a circuit overseer today.
Brother Knorr explained
there was a great need
and that Brother Booth could be a big help
because of his experience as a pioneer.
But Brother Booth replied
that he had never had
a position in the congregation.
He had never given a talk.
Can you imagine?
And he had no training to do so.
But here’s what Brother Knorr said:
“Eloquent speakers are not what is needed,
“just someone who loves the service
and will take the lead in it
and will talk about service at the meetings.”
Brother Booth said:
“With misgivings, doubts, and fears,
but wanting to do Jehovah’s will,
I agreed to try it.”
Well, how did it turn out?
Brother Booth moved forward.
He spent his whole life in full-time service,
later serving for more than 20 years
as a member of the Governing Body.
When he finished his earthly course,
The Watchtower  stated:
“[He] was beloved
for his profoundly humble
and kind Christian personality.”
Obviously, Jehovah saw something good
in Brother John Booth.
Well, what do we learn from these examples?
Like Gideon and Moses
and Jeremiah and Brother Booth,
we might feel inadequate
for certain assignments.
And it’s good that we’re not overconfident
or too self-reliant.
Yet, we don’t want to go
to the other extreme either.
If so, you see, we could begin to think:
‘I could never be a pioneer.
I could never be a ministerial servant.
‘I could never be an elder.
I could never be a Bethelite.
I could never be a construction servant,’
and on and on and on.
If we’re given one of those assignments
or some other one,
we could even hesitate to accept
—give in to fear.
But the fact is that we
cannot fully see ourselves
as Jehovah does.
How much better to make ourselves available
and then move forward with the work
that we’re given to do,
looking to Jehovah to make up
for whatever we may lack!
Well, now, you students,
who are soon-to-be graduates,
will no doubt have a variety of assignments
in the coming years.
Whatever those assignments are,
move forward with full confidence in Jehovah.
Jehovah will be with you.
He’ll give you everything that you need
to be successful
in accomplishing the work.
So here’s the question:
Can you see yourself as Jehovah sees you?
Well, perhaps to some extent, yes,
but not completely.
So be ready to listen to counsel
and to make adjustments.
But also, when your good qualities
and your good potential are noticed
and you receive new assignments,
grab hold and move forward.
And may our wonderful God, Jehovah,
always be with you
and bless you as you do so.